---
layout: post
title: Coding in TEI
---
Nic

One of the most important fields of Digital Humanities is the transferral of physical texts to virtual platforms. This transition in media-type is important because the digitization of the humanities makes literature, essays, and information more accessible, as online-versions of texts tend to exist as an open-access resource. Furthermore, digitized texts have a better chance of standing the test of time, making important concepts accessible for the future generations of the technological age. 

One of the tools used to digitize text is TEI, which stands for **Text Encoding Initiative**. 

While TEI is not tied to a specific coding engine, it is still a standardized-language. A non-profit TEI organization has made a mission to keep TEI's coding rules consistent. 

"Since 1994, the TEI Guidelines have been widely used by libraries, museums, publishers, and individual scholars to present texts for online research, teaching, and preservation" - TEI Consortium

###The Yellow Wall-Paper

To get into the world of TEI, our Digital Humanities class focused on transferring "The Yellow Wall-Paper" by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.

While the contents of "The Yellow Wall-Paper" is inconsequential to TEI coding, the story is still something that should be discussed, as it is an important piece of American Literature. 

"The Yellow Wall-Paper" is a story that follows a nameless woman as she devolves into utter insanity. The woman is married to a wealthy doctor, and he locks her into a nursery with yellow walls to prevent the woman from injuring herself in the outside world. 

While the story itself is simplistic, the undertones are what keeps "The Yellow Wall-Paper" relevant to American culture. Gilman wrote the story as a social commentary on the irony of the "fragile woman" ideal. During the turn of the 20th century, the Suffragette movement was on the rise in the United States and the United Kingdom. Gilman's story is a reflection of the movement. The *nameless* woman, devoid of an identity other than being the wife, is a commentary of how society viewed women as secondary citizens, lacking in intelligent thought and personal agency. 

Furthermore, the nameless woman's imprisonment in the nursery is further commentary on society's expectation of women. The nursery is symbolic of a domesticated life. And the husband forcibly locks her in there, symbolizing the fact that women are often trapped into ther own marriages as an obligation to societal norms. 

###Marking the Texts

Becuase "The Yellow Wall-Paper" was published in 1892, the 19th century text does not have a counterpart in TEI language. To bring the story into the coded language, our class was tasked with highlighting punctuations, line breaks, and other characteristics of the text on a word document. 

**Insert Picture**

While the purpose of this exercise was to make the TEI process easier, as pieces of the text were flagged for coding, I found this step unnecessary. In future projects with TEI, I would skip this step entirely, as I never consulted with my marked-up draft when coding. 

###Coding Process

While there are multiple applications available to use the TEI language, our class used Oxygen. 

**Insert Picture**
